Draft of RAG documentation (#18)
rhoai-genaiops/lab-instructions: docs/6-rag/2-vector-stores.md

# 📊 Vector Stores: The Foundation of RAG

<div class="terminal-curl"></div>

Think of vector stores as the specialized libraries that power RAG systems. While a traditional library organizes books alphabetically, vector stores organize information by **meaning**, allowing AI to find relevant content based on semantic similarity rather than just keyword matching.

> For educational platforms like Canopy, this means students can ask "How does bias affect hiring?" and get relevant information even if your course materials use terms like "discrimination in recruitment" or "algorithmic fairness in employment".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For educational platforms like Canopy, this means a student might asks: “How can I make my essay stronger?” Even if the course notes only mention “improving academic writing” or “structuring arguments,” the assistant can still pull the right material.
```

## 🔍 What are Vector Stores?

**Vector stores** (also called vector databases) are specialized databases that store and search through high-dimensional vectors - mathematical representations of text meaning. Here's how they work:

> ![LLS RAG Architecture Diagram](images/rag5.png ':size=60%')

Reviewer 2: Love this one!  
What do you think of also showing one where two different words get converted into two different (very small just to illustrate) embeddings?

Author: seems like a great idea! lemme add to the docs once I generated the image.

Author: done :)

### Why Regular Databases Aren't Enough

Let's use a simple example to understand the difference. Imagine you're building a pet care app with these documents:

**❌ Traditional Keyword Search:**
- Searching for "dog" only finds documents containing the exact word "dog"
- Misses related documents about "puppy", "canine", "golden retriever", or "border collie"
- A search for "cat care" won't find a document titled "Feline Health Tips"
- Can't understand that "My furry friend loves to fetch" is about dogs

**✅ Vector-Based Semantic Search:**
- Searching for "dog" finds documents about puppies, specific breeds, and dog-related concepts
- Understands that "feline" and "cat" are related, so "cat care" finds "Feline Health Tips"
- Recognizes that "furry friend that fetches" is semantically similar to "dog behavior"
- Ranks results by conceptual relevance: "golden retriever training" scores higher than "cat toys" for a "dog" search

The magic happens because vectors capture *meaning*: "puppy", "canine", and "golden retriever" all get similar vector representations because they're conceptually related, even though they share no common letters!

> 

Reviewer 2: Just an idea, what do you think about having a hands-on example on how embeddings work before going into vector databases?

```bash
# Update ApplicationSet definitions with your cluster domain and username
sed -i -e 's/CLUSTER_DOMAIN/<CLUSTER_DOMAIN>/g' /opt/app-root/src/genaiops-gitops/appset-test.yaml
sed -i -e 's/USER_NAME/<USER_NAME>/g' /opt/app-root/src/genaiops-gitops/appset-test.yaml
sed -i -e 's/CLUSTER_DOMAIN/<CLUSTER_DOMAIN>/g' /opt/app-root/src/genaiops-gitops/appset-prod.yaml
sed -i -e 's/USER_NAME/<USER_NAME>/g' /opt/app-root/src/genaiops-gitops/appset-prod.yaml
```

If you didn't applied yet, apply the new 

```bash
# Apply the ApplicationSets
oc apply -f /opt/app-root/src/genaiops-gitops/appset-test.yaml -n <USER_NAME>-toolings
oc apply -f /opt/app-root/src/genaiops-gitops/appset-prod.yaml -n <USER_NAME>-toolings
```

You can verify the ApplicationSets are running and picking up the new configurations:

```bash
# Verify the ApplicationSets are running
oc get applicationsets -n <USER_NAME>-toolings

# Watch Argo CD automatically create the new Milvus applications
oc get applications -n <USER_NAME>-toolings | grep milvus
```

You should see the two Milvus applications, one for `test` and one for `prod` being automatically deployed by Argo CD to their respective namespaces.

> > **💡 Deployment Note**: We're using **standalone deployments** of Milvus with default configurations, which are perfect for development and educational environments. Both test and prod environments provide the full vector database functionality needed for your RAG systems while keeping resource usage reasonable for learning purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **💡 Deployment Note**: We're using **standalone deployments** of Milvus with default configurations, which are perfect for test and prod environments. Both provide the full vector database functionality needed for your RAG systems while keeping resource usage reasonable for learning purposes.
```
